GSoC 2012 Application Template
==============================

You
---

    * Name
    * University / current enrollment
    * Short bio / overview of your background
    * Join the sympy GoogleGroup and introduce yourself
    * Get yourself an account on our Wiki and add your project proposal
    * How can we contact you (email, IRC handle, GitHub username, etc.).

Your Coding Skills
------------------

In your project proposal let us know

    * What platform do you use to code?

Set yourself up
---------------

Do the following:

* Set up your platform to develop with sympy (install git,
  clone https://github.com/sympy/sympy.git, execute tests)
* Create an account at GitHub and fork SymPy (https://github.com/sympy/sympy)
* Find something in sympy that doesn't work or needs improvement and send us a
  git patch fixing it (if you need inspiration, feel free to fix any issue from
  our easy to fix issues list
  http://code.google.com/p/sympy/issues/list?q=label:EasyToFix)
* Report success on the sympy list
* Publish your patch for peer review by creating a pull request on GitHub.  You
  must submit a patch that is successfully reviewed and pushed in to be
  accepted. We do not consider applications without patches. This shows us that
  you know Python and that you are able to interact with the community.
* If you need help with anything, ask on the sympy list
  (http://groups.google.com/group/sympy) or our IRC channel (#sympy on
  freenode) (don't be afraid if you don't know git for example, we'll teach you
  everything that is needed, the only required thing from you is enthusiasm and
  willingness to learn new things)

Your Project
------------

Start a wiki page to work on your proposal at
https://github.com/sympy/sympy/wiki/. If add your proposal there, we
will help you edit it (though understand that we will not help you write
it).

Answer the following questions in your proposal:

* What do you want to achieve?
* If you have chosen an idea from our list, why did you choose this specific
  idea?
* If you are proposing a project of your own, what is unique about it?
* What qualifications do you have to implement your idea.  For example, if you
  are implementing solvers for partial differential equations, what courses
  have you taken or books have you read on PDEs?
* What makes you suited to do the project?
* How much time do you plan to invest in the project before, during, and after
  the Summer of Code? (we expect full time 40h/week during GSoC, but better
  make this explicit)
* Please provide a schedule of how this time will be spent on subtasks
  of the project over the period of the summer. While this is only
  preliminary, we will use it to help monitor your progress throughout
  the program.  Also understand that during the project you will issue
  weekly progress reports against that plan on your blog.

You do not need to format your application as a question/answer format
for the above questions, but we expect to see all of the above questions
answered in your application somewhere.
