Feel free to split these into separate wikis.

==Review Board ==

http://review-board.org/

===Installing on Debian===
Add <pre>deb http://ftp.cz.debian.org/debian/ experimental main</pre> into your <tt>/etc/apt/sources.list</tt>. Install packages:
<pre>
$ sudo apt-get install -t experimental python-django
$ sudo apt-get install python-pysqlite2
</pre>
Install reviewboard:
<pre>
$ svn co http://reviewboard.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/reviewboard
$ cd reviewboard
$ cp settings_local.py.tmpl settings_local.py
</pre>
Add/edit this in <tt>settings_local.py</tt>:
<pre>
DATABASE_ENGINE = 'sqlite3'
DATABASE_NAME = 'reviewboard.sqlite'
</pre>
Create the database (and answer the questions below):
<pre>
$ ./manage.py syncdb
[...]
You just installed Django's auth system, which means you don't have any superusers defined.
Would you like to create one now? (yes/no): yes
Username (Leave blank to use 'ondra'): root
E-mail address: some@email.cz
Password: 
Password (again): 
Superuser created successfully.
[...]
</pre>
Run builtin server:
<pre>
$ ./manage.py runserver
</pre>
Go to http://127.0.0.1:8000 and check that everything works.

'''Configuration''':
Login with the superuser you created above, go to the "admin" site, select "Add" next to the "Repositories" label in the Scmtools section. Give your repository a name (sympy) and path (http://hg.sympy.org/sympy), and select the type of the server (Mercurial).

'''Note''': all attached patches needs to be produced by "hg di" without the "--git" option, otherwise it won't work (not implemented yet in reviewboard), but the fix will be easy, I investigated that already. --[[User:Ondrej|Ondrej]] 06:11, 27 January 2008 (CST)

==How to code in C==

Linus says, that C++ is a horrible language and that you can do the same things in C, the same efficient.
So I did a thourough investigation of all the different approaches of object oriented design in C, see this link:

http://groups.google.com/group/sympy/browse_thread/thread/c8ad9b76785a9c27/

for thourough discussion and links to libraries/sources. --[[User:Ondrej|Ondrej]] 10:26, 14 January 2008 (CST)

== Other ==

[[ODEnotes]]

[[Category:Development]]
