I am currently in a leave from [http://cens.ioc.ee/ CENS, (Tallinn, Estonia)]
where I work as Senior Researcher and my research involves studying
nonlinear wave phenomena in the fields like soliton theory, water wave theory (I am specialized in modelling extreme wave events)
as well as nonlinear optics.

I got my PhD in 2001 on a topic of soliton theory dealing with multi-soliton interaction patterns and inverse problems
(see my CV below for more information).

I am working in [http://www.simula.no Simula Research Laboratory (Oslo, Norway)] as a Reseach Scientist. Here my research is focused
on developing scientific software.

I am the author of the [http://sympycore.googlecode.com Sympy Core] project that aims at developing a CAS for Python
with a robust, efficient, and easily extendable core parts.

I am the author of [http://cens.ioc.ee/projects/f2py2e/ F2PY] tool that has become a standard tool to connect Fortran
and Python programs.

I am a co-author of the [http://www.scipy.org SciPy] project that provides high-performance tools for
performing scientific computations in Python.

I am a developer of the [http://www.numpy.org NumPy] project where I am mainly responsible for the numpy.distutils
and numpy.f2py packages as well as many smaller modules.

My (oldish) homepage that contains CV and other information: http://cens.ioc.ee/~pearu/

My (not a very verbose) blog: http://pearu.blogspot.com

My relation to Python is summarized in a [http://www.pythonthreads.com/articles/interviews/once-i-learned-about-python,-i-stopped-trying-out-different-languages.html Python Threads Interview]:)

I am married and have a German Shepherd dog [http://www.kutsu.ee/koer/edisson Poiss] and my other
hobies include [http://www.veemoto.ee Power Boating] and [http://merelaager.ee Sea camping for kids].
